.TH KLGAIN 1 "XKL Utilities (March 1, 1999)" "MIT Speech Group" \" -*- nroff -*-
.SH NAME
klgain \- scales one or more Klatt (.wav) audio files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B klgain [-h | --help] [-g <Gain>] [-m] <wav1> [...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.B klgain 
scales one or more Klatt (.wav) audio files. 


<wav1> is the file containing the original waveform

The (scaled) output wav files will have "_scaled" appended to them.
So, if you type 'klgain good', the output file is 'good_scaled.wav'.

The .wav extension is optional on the file names.

With no arguments, the program prints out the usage message.

.SS OPTIONS
With nod options, the program will print out the sampling rate,
number of samples, header version, the byte-order (endian) type, and
some statistics for the wav file.

.TP
.I "\-\-help or \-h"
Print a usage message.

.TP

If both -m and -g are specified, then the -g option is ignored.

.I "\-g" <Gain> 
specifies the gain (multiplication) factor.

.I "\-m"
scales the waveforms to 75% of the maximum range.  

75% of maximum value was chosen to match the amplitude of the waveform
on the VAXstations.  When recording on the VAXstations, if the
amplitude of the waveform is greater than 7500 (75% of maximum value
on VAX) then the waveform gets clipped.  Therefore, the waveform is
only scaled to 75% to be consistent across both the VAX and the UNIX
platforms.

.SH EXAMPLES
klgain quiet.wav

.SH AUTHOR
Send bugs or comments to xkldev@speech.mit.edu.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR concat (1),
.BR klinfo (1),
.BR klplay (1),
.BR klrecord (1),
.BR kl2raw (1),
.BR raw2kl (1),
.BR kl2sd (1),
.BR sd2kl (1),
.BR kl2mac (1),
.BR mac2kl (1),
.BR kl2ms (1),
.BR ms2kl (1),
.BR kl2mat (1),
.BR mat2kl (1)
